[Java annotation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_annotation)
----------

-   An **annotation** is a form of syntactic [metadata](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metadata) that can be added to [Java](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_(programming_language)) source code.

-   Classes, methods, variables, parameters and packages may be annotated.

-   Unlike [Javadoc](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Javadoc) tags, Java annotations can be [reflective](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reflection_(computer_science)) in that they can be embedded in class files generated by the compiler and may be retained by the Java VM to be made retrievable at run-time.

-   Annotations became available in the language itself beginning with version 1.5 of the JDK.

-   Java defines a set of annotations that are built into the language. Of the seven standard annotations, three are part of java.lang, and the remaining four are imported from java.lang.annotation.

-   **Annotations applied to Java code:**
    * **@Override** - Checks that the method is an override. Causes a compile error if the method is not found in one of the parent classes or implemented interfaces.
    * **@Deprecated** - Marks the method as obsolete. Causes a compile warning if the method is used.
    * **@SuppressWarnings** - Instructs the compiler to suppress the [compile time](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compile_time) warnings specified in the annotation parameters.

-   **Annotations applied to other annotations (also known as "Meta Annotations")**: 
    * **@Retention** - Specifies how the marked annotation is stored. Whether in code only, compiled into the class, or available at runtime through reflection.
    * **@Documented** - Marks another annotation for inclusion in the documentation.
    * **@Target** - Marks another annotation to restrict what kind of Java elements the annotation may be applied to.
    * **@Inherited** - Marks another annotation to be inherited to subclasses of annotated class (by default annotations are not inherited to subclasses).

-   Since Java 7, three additional annotations have been added to the language.
    * **@SafeVarargs** - Suppress warnings for all callers of a method or constructor with a generics varargs parameter, since Java 7.
    * **@FunctionalInterface** - Specifies that the type declaration is intended to be a [functional interface](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anonymous_function) (anonymous function named as Lambda Expressions), since Java 8.
    *  **@Repeatable** - Specifies that the annotation can be applied more than once to the same declaration, since Java 8.

-   Below *example* shows the use of the @Override annotation. It instructs the compiler to check parent classes for matching methods. In this case, an error is generated as the gettype() method of class Cat does not in fact override getType() of class Animal as desired. If the @Override annotation was absent, a new method of name gettype() would be created in class Cat.

```java
 public class Animal  { 
	public  void speak() { 
	}
	public  String getType() { 
		return  "Generic animal"; 
	} 
 }
 
 public class Cat extends  Animal {
	@Override 
	public  void speak() { // This is a good override.
		System.out.println("Meow.");
	}
	@Override 
	public  String gettype() { // Compile-time error due to mistyped name.
	    return  "Cat"; 
	}
  }
```

-   **Custom annotations**
    * Annotation type declarations are similar to normal interface declarations. An at-sign (@) precedes the interface keyword.
    * Method declarations must not have any parameters or a throws clause.
    * Return types are restricted to primitives, String, Class, enums, annotations, and arrays of the preceding types.

-   The compiler reserves a set of special annotations (including @Deprecated, @Override and  @SuppressWarnings ) for syntactic purposes.
